About Libsmoldyn
================

Libsmoldyn is a C, C++, and Python interface to the Smoldyn simulator.
Libsmoldyn is complementary to the stand-alone Smoldyn program in that
it is a little more difficult to use, but it provides much more
flexibility. In addition, Libsmoldyn provides: (*i*) an application
programming interface (API) that will be relatively stable, even as
Smoldyn is updated and improved, (*ii*) function names that are
relatively sensible and that shouldn’t collide with other function names
in other software, and (*iii*) reasonably thorough error checking in
every function which helps ensure that the user is using the function in
a sensible way and in a way that won’t crash Smoldyn.

Libsmoldyn was originally written as a C API, but one that should work
with C++ as well. Then, in 2019 and 2020, Dilawar Singh added Python
bindings to it, which are still quite new but generally work well.

Libsmoldyn only barely supports graphics at present due to constraints
imposed by the glut code library. This will be improved in a future
version (by changing to the freeglut library, which doesn’t insist on
controlling the main event loop, as the glut library does).

Linking with C/C++
==================

Compiling
---------

Header files
~~~~~~~~~~~~

To enable a C or C++ program to call Libsmoldyn, it has to include the
Libsmoldyn header file. Libsmoldyn comes with one header file,
libsmoldyn.h, which has function declarations for all of the Libsmoldyn
functions. For most Libsmoldyn applications, this is the only header
file that you will need to include. For Mac and Linux, it is typically
installed to /usr/local/include. This is one of the standard system
paths, so include it with

   ``#include <libsmoldyn.h>``

If the libsmoldyn.h header file is in some other directory or if your
system isn’t seeing its path as a system path, then include the file
using double quotes rather than angle brackets and/or include more
information about the path. For example,
``#include "/user/local/include/libsmoldyn.h"``.

Libsmoldyn.h calls a second header file, smoldyn.h, which is also
typically installed to /usr/local/include/. If you plan to access the
Smoldyn data structure directly, then you will also need to include it
with ``#include <smoldyn.h>``. In general, it is safe to read from this
data structure but it can be dangerous to write to it unless you really
know what you are doing. Also, working with this data structure directly
bypasses one of the benefits of using Libsmoldyn, which is that the
interface should be relatively immune to future Smoldyn developments,
because different aspects of the internal data structure get changed
once in a while.

The smoldyn.h header calls yet another header file, smoldynconfigure.h,
which is also installed by default in /usr/local/include/. That file is
automatically generated by the build system. It describes what Smoldyn
components are included in the build, what system the build was compiled
for, etc. This might be helpful to include for some applications.

Compiling example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the ``examples/S97_libsmoldyn/testcode/`` directory, you’ll find the
testcode.c program. To compile this source code to object code, enter:

   ``gcc -Wall -O0 -g -c testcode.c``

The compile flags ``-O0 -g`` aren’t necessary but can be useful for
debugging purposes. If compiling doesn’t work at this stage, it’s
probably because you’re missing the header files. Make sure that you
have libsmoldyn.h, smoldyn.h, and smoldyn_config.h in the
``/usr/local/include`` directory.

Linking
-------

Linking the different object files together to create an executable that
actually runs is often one of the greatest frustrations of using
software libraries. It should be easy but usually isn’t.

The Libsmoldyn library can be linked statically, meaning that the
Libsmoldyn code will be copied into the final result, or it can be
linked dynamically, so that the final result will simply reference the
Libsmoldyn code that is stored separately. Dynamic linking is somewhat
more elegant in that it doesn’t create unnecessary copies of the
compiled code. It can also be easier. On the other hand, it’s less
convenient if you plan to distribute your software, because then you
need to make sure that you distribute the Libsmoldyn header file and
library code along with your own software. Also, I can only get the gdb
debugger to help find errors within Libsmoldyn if the library is
statically linked.

The Libsmoldyn static library is called libsmoldyn_static.a and the
Libsmoldyn dynamic library is called libsmoldyn_shared.so (on Linux; the
.so suffix is replaced by .dylib on a Mac and by .dll on Windows). By
default, these libraries are installed to /usr/local/lib/.

Linking examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following are several example for static and dynamic linking. They are
shown for C; if you use C++, then link with g++ instead of gcc. The
linking options for Smoldyn compiled with OpenGL are shown for
Macintosh; these lines are simpler for other systems.

I have had a hard time getting static linking working on a Mac, although
apparently it works fine on Ubuntu. The problem is that it doesn’t find
the standard C++ library. The solution is to build the Smoldyn library
without NSV, so that the standard C++ library isn’t needed. I also
commented out a few “throw” statements from smolsim.c and libsmoldyn.c
for this purpose.

Static link, no OpenGL:

   ``gcc testcode.o /usr/local/lib/libsmoldyn_static.a -o testcode``

Static link, with OpenGL:

   ``gcc testcode.o /usr/local/lib/libsmoldyn_static.a -I/System/Library/Frameworks/OpenGL.framework/Headers -I/System/Library/Frameworks/GLUT.framework/Headers -framework GLUT -framework OpenGL -framework Cocoa -L/System/Library/Frameworks/OpenGL.framework/Libraries -o testcode -ltiff``

Dynamic link, no OpenGL:

   ``gcc testcode.o -o testcode -lsmoldyn_shared``

Dynamic link, with OpenGL:

   ``gcc test1.o -L/usr/local/lib -I/System/Library/Frameworks/OpenGL.framework/Headers -I/System/Library/Frameworks/GLUT.framework/Headers -framework GLUT -framework OpenGL -framework Cocoa -L/System/Library/Frameworks/OpenGL.framework/Libraries -o test1 -lsmoldyn_shared -ltiff``

Use with Python
===============

Installing
----------

Hopefully, you should be able to install using

::

   python3 -m pip install smoldyn --user --pre

This should install the smoldyn nightly package, from:
https://pypi.org/project/smoldyn/

Alternatively, the Mac distribution comes with a Python wheel, called
something like smoldyn-2.62-py3-none-any.whl. You should be able to
write “pip install smoldyn...whl” and that will install it for you as
well.

For Windows, “pip install smoldyn” seems to work initially, but it
doesn’t install the necessary compiled code, so it doesn’t actually run,
yet.

Command line flags
------------------

The Python interface offers the following command line flags:

======================== ====================================
Flags                    Function
======================== ====================================
``input``                Load input file
``–overwrite``, ``-w``   Overwrite any existing data file
``–quit-at-end``, ``-q`` Quit when the simulation is complete
``–args``, ``-A``        Smoldyn command line arguments
======================== ====================================

Files
-----

After building Smoldyn (assuming you were in
``/path/to/Smoldyn-official/build`` directory when you ran ``make``
command), the python module ends up in the
``/path/to/Smoldyn-official/build/py`` directory. The module can be
imported into Python from this directory. Add this directory to your
``PYTHONPATH`` temporarily with
``export PTYHONPATH=/path/to/Smoldyn-official/build/py:$PYTHONPATH``.
With this, the module can be accessed from any directory.

Note that it’s possible to see where the library is imported from by
checking ``smoldyn.__file__`` while in Python. For example,

::

   >>> import smoldyn
   >>> print(smoldyn.__file__)
   /home/dilawars/Work/FORKES/Smoldyn-official/build/py/smoldyn/__init__.py

Python-specific functionality
-----------------------------

Python offers a callback function that enables Smoldyn setup functions
to be called repeatedly and automatically. Following is the text from
Dilawar’s description.

Suppose I have the following function which generates a noisy value
using the current time ``t`` and a list of arguments ``args``.

::

   def computeVm(t, args):
       x, y = args 
       return math.sin(t) + x * y + random.random()

And I have a molecular species ``ca``.

::

   import smoldyn
   ca = smoldyn.Species('ca', difc=1, color='blue', display_size=1)

Then the following connect the output of function computeVm to ca.difc
parameter. This is called every 10th step.

::

   smoldyn.connect(computeVm, "ca.difc", step=10, args=[1,2.1])

In smoldyn.connect function, both source and target must be global
variables. In the example below, I made a a global variable before I
used it in connect. Else there will be a runtime error.

::

   import smoldyn as S
   import random

   a = None

   def new_dif(t, args):
       global a
       x, y = args
       print(a.difc)
       return t + random.random()

   def test_connect():
       global a
       S.setBounds(low=(0, 0), high=(10, 10))
       a = S.Species("a", color="red", difc=1)
       S.connect(new_dif, "a.difc", step=10, args=[0, 1])
       s = S.Simulation(100, 1)
       s.run()
       print("All done")

   test_connect()

Also accepts a function.

::

   def new_dif(t, args):
       global a, avals
       x, y = args
       # note that b.difc is not still updated.
       avals.append((t, a.difc["soln"]))
       return x * math.sin(t) + y

   def update_difc(val):
       global a
       a.difc = val

   def test_connect():
       global a, avals
       S.setBounds(low=(0, 0), high=(10, 10))
       a = S.Species("a", color="black", difc=0.1)
       S.connect(new_dif, update_difc, step=10, args=[1, 1])
       s = S.Simulation(100, 1)
       s.run()
       for a, b in zip(avals[1:], expected_a[1:]):
           print(a, b)
           assert math.isclose(a[1], b[1], rel_tol=1e-6, abs_tol=1e-6), (a[1], b[1])

   test_connect()

Dilawar created some nice examples of this in use with a pre-synaptic
bouton with N synaptic vesicles. These vesicles fuse with the bottom of
the bouton (red surface). Upon fusion, one vesicle releases 1000
neurotransmitters which decay with time-constant :math:`\tau`.

The rate of release is controlled by a function. This is set by
smoldyn.connect. The function generates s spike 0 or 1, if the value is
1 the rate is set to 1000 else it is 0.

Error trapping
==============

Every function in Libsmoldyn checks that its input values are acceptable
and also that no errors arise in the function execution. These errors
are returned to the host library in a number of ways. Most Libsmoldyn
functions (e.g. ``smolRunSim``) return any error codes directly, which
makes it easy to see if an error arose. However, a few functions (e.g.
``smolNewSim``) return other types of values and so return some other
indication of success or failure (e.g. ``NULL``). In addition, some
functions can raise warnings, which indicate that behavior is unusual
but not incorrect.

For all of these errors and warnings, get the details of the problem
using the function ``smolGetError``, which will return the error code,
the name of the function where the error arose, and a descriptive error
string. This will also clear the error, if desired. If errors are not
cleared, they are left until they are overwritten by subsequent errors.
Warnings are also left until they are cleared or overwritten.

When writing code, it can be helpful to put Libsmoldyn into its
debugging mode using the ``smolSetDebugMode`` function. Doing this
causes any errors that arise to be displayed to stderr.

The possible error codes are declared in libsmoldyn.h with:

::

   enum ErrorCode {ECok=0, ECnotify=-1, ECwarning=-2, ECnonexist=-3, ECall=-4, ECmissing=-5, ECbounds=-6, ECsyntax=-7, ECerror=-8, ECmemory=-9, ECbug=-10, ECsame=-11}

Their interpretations are:

+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| value | code           | interpretation                            |
+=======+================+===========================================+
| 0     | ``ECok``       | no error                                  |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -1    | ``ECnotify``   | message about correct behavior            |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -2    | ``ECwarning``  | unusual but not incorrect behavior        |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -3    | ``ECnonexist`` | a function input specifies an item that   |
|       |                | doesn’t exist                             |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -4    | ``ECsame``     | error code should be unchanged from a     |
|       |                | prior code                                |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -5    | ``ECall``      | an argument of “all" was found and may    |
|       |                | not be permitted                          |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -6    | ``ECmissing``  | a necessary function input parameter is   |
|       |                | missing                                   |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -7    | ``ECbounds``   | a function input parameter is out of      |
|       |                | bounds                                    |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -8    | ``ECsyntax``   | function inputs don’t make syntactical    |
|       |                | sense                                     |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -9    | ``ECerror``    | unspecified error condition               |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -10   | ``ECmemory``   | Smoldyn was unable to allocate the        |
|       |                | necessary memory                          |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+
| -11   | ``ECbug``      | error arose which should not have been    |
|       |                | possible                                  |
+-------+----------------+-------------------------------------------+

Error checking system internal to libsmoldyn.c
----------------------------------------------

This section describes how to write Libsmoldyn functions using error
checking. While it is an essential part of all Libsmoldyn functions,
these details are not important for most Libsmoldyn users.

#. The first line of every Libsmoldyn function should be
   ``const char *funcname="``\ *function_name*\ ``";``. This name will
   be returned with any error message to tell the user where the error
   arose.

#. Within the function, check for warnings or errors with either the
   ``LCHECK`` or ``LCHECKNT`` macros. In both cases, the macro format is
   ``LCHECK(``\ *condition*\ ``, funcname,``\ *error_code*\ ``, "``\ *message*\ ``");``.
   The macros check that the test *condition* is true, and calls either
   ``smolSetError`` or ``smolSetErrorNT`` to deal with it if not. The
   *message* should be a descriptive message that is under 256
   characters in length. Use the regular version (not the “no throw” or
   “NT”) version for errors that arise within the function, and the “NT”
   version for errors that arise is subroutines of the function, so that
   only a single error message is displayed to the output.

#. Most functions return an “\ ``enum ErrorCode``". If this is the case
   for your function, and your function might return a notification
   and/or a warning, then end the main body of the function with
   ``return libwarncode;``. If it cannot return a notification or a
   warning, then end it with ``return ECok;``. Finally, if it does not
   return an “\ ``enum ErrorCode``", then it needs to return some other
   error condition that will tell the user to check for errors using
   ``smolGetError``.

#. After the main body of the function, add a goto target called
   ``failure:``.

#. Assuming the function returns an “\ ``enum ErrorCode``", end the
   function with ``return liberrorcode;``.

The ``smolSetTimeStep`` function provides an excellent and simple
example of how Libsmoldyn functions typically address errors. It is:

   ::

      enum ErrorCode smolSetTimeStep(simptr sim, double timestep) {
          const char *funcname="smolSetTimeStep";

          LCHECK(sim, funcname, ECmissing, "missing sim");
          LCHECK(timestep>0, funcname, ECbounds, "timestep is not > 0");
          simsettime(sim, timestep, 3);
          return ECok;
       failure:
          return liberrorcode; }

The ``smolGet...Index`` functions are worth a comment. Each of these
functions returns the index of an item, such as a species or a surface,
based on the name of the item. If the name is not found or other errors
arise, then these functions return the error code, cast as an integer.
Also, if the name is “all", then these functions return the error code
``ECall`` and set the error string “species cannot be ‘all’", or
equivalent. A typical use of these functions is seen in
``smolSetSpeciesMobility``, which includes the following code:

   ::

      i=smolGetSpeciesIndex(sim, species);
      if(i==(int)ECall) smolClearError();
      else LCHECK(i>0, funcname, ECsame, NULL);

In this particular case, this function permits an input of “all", so it
clears errors that arise from this return value, and leaves ``i`` as a
negative value for later use.

Libsmoldyn quick function guide
===============================

The Libsmoldyn functions correspond relatively closely to the Smoldyn
language statements, although not perfectly. However, all functionality
should be available using either method. The following table lists the
correspondences. Statements preceded by asterisks need to be either
entered in statement blocks or preceded by the statement’s context (e.g.
with ``surface`` *name*). Where correspondence does not apply, the table
lists “N/A". The Libsmoldyn functions are available either through the
C/C++ API or through the Python API, with essentially identical input
styles. The Python functions listed here use a more object-oriented
approach. Here, “S” is short for smoldyn, arising for example as
``import smoldyn as S``.

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Statement            | Libsmoldyn function  | Python function      |
+======================+======================+======================+
| **About the input**  |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| #                    | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| /\* ... \*/          | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| read_file            | ``LoadSimFromFile``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``ReadConfigString`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| end_file             | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| define               | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| define_global        | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| undefine             | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| ifdefine             | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| ifundefine           | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| else                 | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| endif                | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| display_define       | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``SetError``         |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetError``         |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``ClearError``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``SetDebugMode``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | `                    |                      |
|                      | `ErrorCodeToString`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Space and time**   |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| dim                  | ``NewSim``           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| boundaries           | ``NewSim``           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetBoundaryType``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| low_wall             | ``NewSim``           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetBoundaryType``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| high_wall            | ``NewSim``           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetBoundaryType``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| time_start           | ``SetSimTimes``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetTimeStart``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| time_stop            | ``SetSimTimes``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetTimeStop``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| time_step            | ``SetSimTimes``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetTimeStep``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| time_now             | ``SetTimeNow``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Molecules**        |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| species              | ``AddSpecies``       | ``S.Species``        |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetSpeciesIndex``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetSpeciesName``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| difc                 | ``                   | *species*\ ``.difc`` |
|                      | SetSpeciesMobility`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| difm                 | ``                   |                      |
|                      | SetSpeciesMobility`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| drift                | ``                   |                      |
|                      | SetSpeciesMobility`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| mol                  | ``Ad                 | *species*            |
|                      | dSolutionMolecules`` | \ ``.addToSolution`` |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| surface_mol          | ``A                  |                      |
|                      | ddSurfaceMolecules`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| compartment_mol      | ``AddCo              |                      |
|                      | mpartmentMolecules`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| molecule_lists       | ``AddMolList``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| mol_list             | ``AddSpecies``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetMolList``       | *spe                 |
|                      |                      | cies*\ ``.mol_list`` |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetMolListIndex``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetMolListName``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| max_mol              | ``SetMaxMolecules``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetMoleculeCount`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Graphics**         |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| graphics             | `                    |                      |
|                      | `SetGraphicsParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| graphic_iter         | `                    |                      |
|                      | `SetGraphicsParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| graphic_delay        | `                    |                      |
|                      | `SetGraphicsParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| frame_thickness      | ``SetFrameStyle``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| frame_color          | ``SetFrameStyle``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| grid_thickness       | ``SetGridStyle``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| grid_color           | ``SetGridStyle``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| background_color     | ``                   |                      |
|                      | SetBackgroundStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| display_size         | ``SetMoleculeStyle`` | *spe                 |
|                      |                      | cies*\ ``.setStyle`` |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      |                      | *species*\ ``.size`` |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| color                | ``SetMoleculeStyle`` | *                    |
|                      |                      | species*\ ``.color`` |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| tiff_iter            | ``SetTiffParams``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| tiff_name            | ``SetTiffParams``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| tiff_min             | ``SetTiffParams``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| tiff_max             | ``SetTiffParams``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| light                | ``SetLightParams``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| text_color           | ``SetTextStyle``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| text_display         | ``AddTextDisplay``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Run-time           |                      |                      |
| commands**           |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| output_root          | ``SetOutputPath``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| output_files         | ``AddOutputFile``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| append_files         | ``AddOutputFile``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| output_file_number   | ``AddOutputFile``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| cmd                  | ``AddCommand``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``Ad                 |                      |
|                      | dCommandFromString`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Surfaces**         |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| start_surface        | ``AddSurface``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| new_surface          | ``AddSurface``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* name              | ``AddSurface``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetSurfaceIndex``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetSurfaceName``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* action            | ``SetSurfaceAction`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* rate              | ``SetSurfaceRate``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* rate_internal     | ``SetSurfaceRate``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* color             | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceFaceStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceEdgeStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* thickness         | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceEdgeStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* stipple           | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceEdgeStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* polygon           | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceFaceStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* shininess         | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceFaceStyle`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* panel             | ``AddPanel``         |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetPanelIndex``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetPanelName``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* jump              | ``SetPanelJump``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* neighbors         | ``AddPanelNeighbor`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* unbounded_emitter | ``AddSurfa           |                      |
|                      | ceUnboundedEmitter`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* end_surface       | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| epsilon              | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceSimParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| margin               | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceSimParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| neighbor_dist        | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceSimParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Compartments**     |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| start_compartment    | ``AddCompartment``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| new_compartment      | ``AddCompartment``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* name              | ``AddCompartment``   |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``G                  |                      |
|                      | etCompartmentIndex`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``                   |                      |
|                      | GetCompartmentName`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* surface           | ``Add                |                      |
|                      | CompartmentSurface`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* point             | ``A                  |                      |
|                      | ddCompartmentPoint`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* compartment       | ``A                  |                      |
|                      | ddCompartmentLogic`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* end_compartment   | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Reactions**        |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction             | ``AddReaction``      | ``S.Reaction``       |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetReactionIndex`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetReactionName``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_cmpt        | `                    |                      |
|                      | `SetReactionRegion`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_surface     | `                    |                      |
|                      | `SetReactionRegion`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_rate        | ``AddReaction``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|                      | ``SetReactionRate``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| confspread_radius    | ``SetReactionRate``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| binding_radius       | ``SetReactionRate``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_probability | ``SetReactionRate``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_production  | ``SetReactionRate``  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_permit      | not supported        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| reaction_forbid      | not supported        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| product_placement    | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etReactionProducts`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Ports**            |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| start_port           | ``AddPort``          |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| new_port             | ``AddPort``          |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* name              | ``AddPort``          |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetPortIndex``     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetPortName``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* surface           | ``AddPort``          |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* face              | ``AddPort``          |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| \* end_port          | N/A                  |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``AddPortMolecules`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``GetPortMolecules`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Simulation         |                      |                      |
| settings**           |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| rand_seed            | ``SetRandomSeed``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| accuracy             | not supported        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| molperbox            | ``SetPartitions``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| boxsize              | ``SetPartitions``    |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| gauss_table_size     | not supported        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| epsilon              | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceSimParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| margin               | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceSimParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| neighbor_dist        | ``S                  |                      |
|                      | etSurfaceSimParams`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| pthreads             | not supported        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| **Libdyn actions**   |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``UpdateSim``        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``RunTimeStep``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``RunSim``           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``RunSimUntil``      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``FreeSim``          |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``DisplaySim``       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| N/A                  | ``                   |                      |
|                      | PrepareSimFromFile`` |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Data structures and declarations
================================

Enumerations
------------

In C, enumerations are already defined, so they can be used as is. Here
is an example of using an enumerated error code as an argument,

::

   smolErrorCodeToString(ECwarning, mystring)

In Python, enumerations are most easily dealt with by defining a
variable for the enumerated list and then choosing from it. Here is an
example,

::

   import smoldyn._smoldyn as S
   EC=S.ErrorCode
   S.errorCodeToString(EC.warning, mystring)

Surface actions (SrfAction)

========= ========== ======== ==============================
Statement Libsmoldyn Python   Notes
========= ========== ======== ==============================
reflect   SAreflect  reflect  
transmit  SAtrans    trans    
absorb    SAabsorb   absorb   
jump      SAjump     jump     
port      SAport     port     
multiple  SAmult     mult     multiple actions
N/A       SAno       no       static surface-bound molecules
N/A       SAnone     none     none of the other options
N/A       SAadsorb   adsorb   internal use only
N/A       SArevdes   revdes   internal use only
N/A       SAirrevdes irrevdes internal use only
N/A       SAflip     flip     internal use only
========= ========== ======== ==============================

Molecule state (MolecState)

========= ========== ====== =====================================
Statement Libsmoldyn Python Notes
========= ========== ====== =====================================
soln      MSsoln     soln   
front     MSfront    front  
back      MSback     back   
up        MSup       up     
down      MSdown     down   
bsoln     MSbsoln    bsoln  pseudo-state for surface interactions
all       MSall      all    for model creation by user
N/A       MSnone     none   internal use only
========= ========== ====== =====================================

Panel face (PanelFace)

========= ========== ====== ==========================
Statement Libsmoldyn Python Notes
========= ========== ====== ==========================
front     PFfront    front  
back      PFback     back   
N/A       PFnone     none   internal use only
both      PFboth     both   for model creation by user
========= ========== ====== ==========================

Panel shape (PanelShape)

========= ========== ====== ==========================
Statement Libsmoldyn Python Notes
========= ========== ====== ==========================
rect      PSrect     rect   rectangle
tri       PStri      tri    triangle
sph       PSsph      sph    sphere
cyl       PScyl      cyl    cylinder
hemi      PShemi     hemi   hemisphere
disk      PSdisk     disk   disk
all       PSall      all    for model creation by user
N/A       PSnone     none   internal use only
========= ========== ====== ==========================

Libsmoldyn error code (ErrorCode)

========= ========== ======== =========
Statement Libsmoldyn Python   Notes
========= ========== ======== =========
N/A       ECok       ok       value 0
N/A       ECnotify   notify   value -1
N/A       ECwarning  warning  value -2
N/A       ECnonexist nonexist value -3
N/A       ECall      all      value -4
N/A       ECmissing  missing  value -5
N/A       ECbounds   bounds   value -6
N/A       ECsyntax   syntax   value -7
N/A       ECerror    error    value -8
N/A       ECmemory   memory   value -9
N/A       ECbug      bug      value -10
N/A       ECsame     same     value -11
N/A       ECwildcard wildcard value -12
========= ========== ======== =========

Libsmoldyn header file
----------------------

The Libsmoldyn header file is libsmoldyn.h. It lists all of the function
declarations. This file references smoldyn.h, which lists all of the
data structure declarations and enumerated type definitions.

If you compiled and installed Smoldyn using the default configuration,
both files should be in your /usr/local/include/smoldyn directory. Also
in this directory is the smoldyn_config.h file. This file was used for
compiling Smoldyn and Libsmoldyn but is not needed afterwards.
Nevertheless, it’s copied to the /usr/local/include/smoldyn directory so
that programs that call Libsmoldyn can know what options Libsmoldyn was
built with.

Libsmoldyn functions
====================

General comments
----------------

None of the functions allocate memory, except within the simulation data
structure. This means, for example, that all functions that return
strings do not allocate these strings themselves, but instead write the
string text to memory that the library user allocated and gave to the
function. All strings are fixed at ``STRCHAR`` characters, where this
constant is defined in string2.h to 256 characters.

Miscellaneous
-------------

GetVersion
   | 
   | C: ``double smolGetVersion(void)``
   | Python: ``float getVersion()``
   | Returns the Smoldyn version number.

Errors
------

SetError
   | 
   | C:
     ``void smolSetError(const char *errorfunction, enum ErrorCode errorcode, const char *errorstring)``
   | C:
     ``void smolSetErrorNT(const char *errorfunction, enum ErrorCode errorcode, const char *errorstring)``
   | Python: N/A
   | These functions are probably not useful for most users. Sets the
     Libsmoldyn error code to ``errorcode``, error function to
     ``errorfunction``, and error string to ``errorstring``. The sole
     exception is if ``errorcode`` is ``ECsame`` then this does nothing
     and simply returns. Back to it’s normal operation, this also either
     sets or clears the Libsmoldyn warning code, as appropriate. If
     ``errorstring`` is entered as ``NULL``, this clears the current
     error string, and similarly for ``errorfunction``. For the regular
     version without the “NT”, if the library is being run in debug
     mode, then this function prints the notification, warning, or error
     out to stderr. It would also ideally throw exceptions if the error
     code is more severe than the ``LibThrowThreshold`` value, but this
     throwing doesn’t work at present because throwing exceptions to the
     host code is incompatible with static linking.

   The “NT” version is the “no throw” version, which is the same as the
   regular version but doesn’t display messages to stderr and doesn’t
   throw exceptions. In general, library functions should call
   ``smolSetError`` for errors caught by that function itself, and
   ``smolSetErrorNT`` for errors caught by subroutines of that function,
   so that each error only leads to a single call of ``smolSetError``.

GetError
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolGetError(char *errorfunction, char *errorstring, int clearerror)``
   | Python: N/A
   | Returns the current LibSmoldyn error code directly, returns the
     function where the error occurred in ``errorfunction`` if it is not
     ``NULL``, and returns the error string in ``errorstring`` if it is
     not ``NULL``. Set ``clearerror`` to 1 to clear the error and 0 to
     leave any error condition unchanged.

ClearError
   | 
   | C: ``void smolClearError(void)``
   | Python: N/A
   | Clears any error condition.

SetDebugMode
   | 
   | C: ``void smolSetDebugMode(int debugmode)``
   | Python: ``setDebugMode(int debugmode)``
   | Enter ``debugmode`` as 1 to enable debugging and 0 to disable
     debugging. When debug mode is turned on, all errors are displayed
     to stderr, as are all cleared errors. By turning on debug mode, you
     can often avoid checking for errors with additional code and you
     also typically don’t need to call ``smolGetError``.

ErrorCodeToString
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolErrorCodeToString(enum ErrorCode erc, char *string)``
   | Python: ``str errorCodeToString(enum ErrorCode erc, str string)``
   | Returns a string both directly and in ``string`` that corresponds
     to the error code in ``erc``. For example, if ``erc`` is
     ``ECmemory``, this returns the string “memory". To do: The string
     is not needed or used in the Python version.

Sim structure
-------------

NewSim
   | 
   | C:
     ``simptr smolNewSim(int dim, double *lowbounds, double *highbounds)``
   | Python:
     ``simptr newSim(int dim, List[float] lowbounds, List[float] highbounds)``
   | Creates and returns a new sim structure. The structure is
     initialized for a ``dim`` dimensional system that has boundaries
     defined by the points ``lowbounds`` and ``highbounds``. Boundaries
     are transmitting (modify them with ``smolSetBoundaryType``).
     Returns ``NULL`` upon failure.
   | **Python to do:** there’s no need for the dim parameter because
     it’s redundant with vector lengths.

UpdateSim
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolUpdateSim(simptr sim)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode updateSim()``
   | Updates the simulation structure. This calculates all simulation
     parameters from physical parameters, sorts lists, and generally
     does everything required to make a simulation ready to run. It may
     be called multiple times.
   | **Python to do:** doesn’t work. Python wants no argument, but
     Libsmoldyn then complains about no argument.

RunTimeStep
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolRunTimeStep(simptr sim)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode runTimeStep()``
   | Runs one time step of the simulation. Returns an error if the
     simulation terminates unexpectedly during this time step or a
     warning if it terminates normally.
   | **Python to do:** doesn’t work. Python wants no argument, but
     Libsmoldyn then complains about no argument.

RunSim
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolRunSim(simptr sim)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode runSim()``
   | Python: ``run(stop=None, start=None, step=None)``
   | Runs the simulation until it terminates. Returns an error if the
     simulation terminates unexpectedly during this time step or a
     warning if it terminates normally.
   | **Python to do:** doesn’t work. Python wants no argument, but
     Libsmoldyn then complains about no argument.

RunSimUntil
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolRunSimUntil(simptr sim, double breaktime)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode runSimUntil(float breaktime)``
   | Python: ``runUntil(t, dt)``
   | Runs the simulation either until it terminates or until the
     simulation time equals or exceeds ``breaktime``.
   | **Python to do:** doesn’t work. Python wants no argument, but
     Libsmoldyn then complains about no argument.

FreeSim
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolFreeSim(simptr sim)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode freeSim()``
   | Frees the simulation data structure.

DisplaySim
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolDisplaySim(simptr sim)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode displaySim()``
   | Displays all relevant information about the simulation system to
     stdout.

Read configuration file
-----------------------

PrepareSimFromFile
   | 
   | C:
     ``simptr smolPrepareSimFromFile(char *filepath, char *filename, char *flags)``
   | Python: ``simptr prepareSimFromFile(str filename, str flags)``
   | Reads the Smoldyn configuration file that is at ``filepath`` and
     has file name ``filename``, sets it up, and outputs simulation
     diagnostics to stdout. Returns the sim structure, or ``NULL`` if an
     error occurred. ``flags`` are the command line flags that are
     entered for normal Smoldyn use. Either or both of ``filepath`` and
     ``flags`` can be sent in as ``NULL`` if there is nothing to report.
     After this function runs successfully, it should be possible to
     call ``smolRunSim`` or ``smolRunTimeStep``.

LoadSimFromFile
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolLoadSimFromFile(char *filepath, char *filename, simptr *simpointer, char *flags)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode loadSimFromFile(str filename, str flags)``
   | Loads part or all of a sim structure from the file that is at
     ``filepath`` and has file name ``filename``. Send in ``simpointer``
     as a pointer to sim, where sim may be an existing simulation
     structure that this function will append or ``NULL`` if it is to be
     created by this function. ``flags`` are the command line flags that
     are entered for normal Smoldyn use. Either or both of ``filepath``
     and ``flags`` can be sent in as ``NULL`` if there is nothing to
     report. After this function runs successfully, call
     ``smolUpdateSim`` to calculate simulation parameters.

ReadConfigString
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolReadConfigString(simptr sim, char *statement, char *parameters)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode readConfigString(str statement, str parameters)``
   | Reads and processes what would normally be a single line of a
     configuration file. The first word of the line is the statement
     name, entered here as ``statement``, while the rest of the line is
     entered as ``parameters``. Separate different parameters with
     spaces. The same parser is used as for normal Smoldyn configuration
     files. This function does not make use of block style input
     formatting, such as for surface definitions. This means that a new
     surface needs to declared with “\ ``new_surface`` *name*" and all
     subsequent surface definitions need to start with “\ ``surface``
     *name*". Analogous rules apply to compartments and port.

Simulation settings
-------------------

SetSimTimes
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetSimTimes(simptr sim, double timestart, double timestop, double timestep)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setSimTimes(float timestart, float timestop, float timestep)``
   | Sets all of the simulation time parameters to the values entered
     here. In addition the simulation “time now" is set to
     ``timestart``.

SetTimeStart
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetTimeStart(simptr sim, double timestart)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setTimeStart(float timestart)``
   | Sets the simulation starting time.

SetTimeStop
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolSetTimeStop(simptr sim, double timestop)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setTimeStop(float timestop)``
   | Sets the simulation stopping time.

SetTimeNow
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolSetTimeNow(simptr sim, double timenow)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setTimeNow(float timenow)``
   | Sets the simulation current time.

SetTimeStep
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolSetTimeStep(simptr sim, double timestep)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setTimeStep(float timestep)``
   | Sets the simulation time step, which must be greater than 0.

SetRandomSeed
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolSetRandomSeed(simptr sim, double seed)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setRandomSeed(int seed)``
   | Sets the random number generator seed to ``seed`` if ``seed`` is at
     least 0, and sets it to the current time value if ``seed`` is less
     than 0.

SetAccuracy
   | 
   | C: not supported
   | Python: ``accuracy(accuracy: float)``
   | Sets or gets the simulation accuracy.

SetPartitions
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetPartitions(simptr sim, char *method, double value)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setPartitions(str method, float value)``
   | Python: ``Partition(name: str, value: float)``
   | Sets the virtual partitions in the simulation volume. Enter
     ``method`` as “molperbox" and then enter ``value`` with the
     requested number of molecules per partition volume; the default,
     which is used if this function is not called at all, is a target of
     4 molecules per box. Or, enter ``method`` as “boxsize" and enter
     ``value`` with the requested partition spacing. In this latter
     case, the actual partition spacing may be larger or smaller than
     the requested value in order to fit an integer number of partitions
     into each coordinate of the simulation volume.

   The second Python option is its own class. I think this should be
   removed because partitions aren’t physical objects and so don’t
   really make sense here.

MoleculePerBox
   | 
   | Python: ``MoleculePerBox(size: float)``
   | This is only available in Python. Again, I think this should be
     removed because partitions aren’t physical objects.

Box
   | 
   | Python: ``Box(size: float)``
   | This is only available in Python. Again, I think this should be
     removed because partitions aren’t physical objects.

Graphics
--------

SetGraphicsParams
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetGraphicsParams(simptr sim, char *method, int timesteps, double delay)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setGraphicsParams(str method, int timesteps, int delay)``
   | Python: ``setGraphics(method: str, timestep: int, delay: int = 0)``
   | Sets basic simulation graphics parameters. Enter ``method`` as
     “none" for no graphics (the default), “opengl" for fast but minimal
     OpenGL graphics, “opengl_good" for improved OpenGL graphics,
     “opengl_better" for fairly good OpenGL graphics, or as ``NULL`` to
     not set this parameter currently. Enter ``timesteps`` with a
     positive integer to set the number of simulation time steps between
     graphics renderings (1 is the default) or with a negative number to
     not set this parameter currently. Enter ``delay`` as a non-negative
     number to set the minimum number of milliseconds that must elapse
     between subsequent graphics renderings in order to improve
     visualization (0 is the default) or as a negative number to not set
     this parameter currently.

SetTiffParams
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetTiffParams(simptr sim, int timesteps, char *tiffname, int lowcount, int highcount)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setTiffParams(int timesteps, str tiffname, int lowcount, int highcount)``
   | Sets parameters for the automatic collection of TIFF format
     snapshots of the graphics window. ``timesteps`` is the number of
     simulation timesteps that should elapse between subsequent
     snapshots, ``tiffname`` is the root filename of the output TIFF
     files, ``lowcount`` is a number that is appended to the filename of
     the first snapshot and which is then incremented for subsequent
     snapshots, and ``highcount`` is the last numbered file that will be
     collected. Enter negative numbers for ``timesteps``, ``lowcount``,
     and/or ``highcount`` to not set these parameters, and enter
     ``NULL`` for ``tiffname`` to not set the file name.

SetLightParams
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetLightParams(simptr sim, int lightindex, double *ambient, double *diffuse, double *specular, double *position)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode smolSetLightParams(int lightindex, List[float] ambient, List[float] diffuse, List[float] specular, List[float] position)``
   | Sets the lighting parameters that are used for the rendering method
     “opengl_better". Enter ``lightindex`` as -1 for the global ambient
     light (in which case ``diffuse``, ``specular``, and ``position``
     should all be ``NULL``) or as 0 to 8 for one of the 8 light
     sources. For each light source, you can specify the 4-value color
     vector for the light’s ambient, diffuse, and specular properties
     (all values should be between 0 and 1). You can also specify the
     3-dimensional position for the light. To not set a property, just
     enter the respective vector as ``NULL``.

SetBackgroundStyle
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetBackgroundStyle(simptr sim, double *color)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setBackgroundStyle(string color)``
   | Sets the color of the graphics display background. ``color`` is a
     4-value vector with red, green, blue, and alpha values (or, in
     Python, a color word).

SetFrameStyle
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetFrameStyle(simptr sim, double thickness, double *color)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setFrameStyle(float thickness, string color)``
   | Sets the thickness and the color of the wire frame that outlines
     the simulation system in the graphics window. Enter ``thickness``
     as 0 for no frame, as a positive number for the number of points in
     thickness, or as a negative number to not set this parameter. Enter
     ``color`` as a 4-value vector with the frame color, or as ``NULL``
     to not set it (or, in Python, a color word).

SetGridStyle
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetGridStyle(simptr sim, double thickness, double *color)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setGridStyle(float thickness, string color)``
   | Sets the thickness and the color of a grid that shows where the
     partitions are that separate Smoldyn’s virtual boxes. Enter
     ``thickness`` as 0 for no grid, as a positive number for the number
     of points in thickness, or as a negative number to not set this
     parameter. Enter ``color`` as a 4-value vector with the grid color,
     or as ``NULL`` to not set it (or, in Python, a color word).

SetTextStyle
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolSetTextStyle(simptr sim, double *color)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setTextStyle(string color)``
   | Sets the color of any text that is displayed to the graphics
     window. ``color`` is a 4-value vector with red, green, blue, and
     alpha values (or, in Python, a color word).

AddTextDisplay
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolAddTextDisplay(simptr sim, char *item)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode addTextDisplay(string item)``
   | Adds ``item`` to the list of things that Smoldyn should display as
     text to the graphics window. Currently supported options are “time"
     and the names of species and, optionally, their states. For species
     and states, the graphics window shows the number of molecules.

Runtime commands
----------------

SetOutputPath
   | 
   | C: ``enum ErrorCode smolSetOutputPath(simptr sim, char *path)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode setOutputPath(string path)``
   | Sets the file path for text output files to ``path``.

AddOutputFile
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddOutputFile(simptr sim, char *filename, int suffix, int append)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addOutputFile(string filename, int suffix, int append)``
   | Declares the file called ``filename`` as a file for output by one
     or more runtime commands. Note that spaces are not permitted in the
     file name. If ``suffix`` is non-negative, then the file name is
     suffixed by this integer, which can be helpful for creating output
     file stacks. Enter ``append`` as 1 if any current file should
     simply be appended, or to 0 if any current file should be
     overwritten.

OpenOutputFiles
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolOpenOutputFiles(simptr sim, int overwrite = 0)``
   | Opens output files for writing. Enter ``overwrite`` as 1 if any
     existing file should be overwritten. If ``overwrite`` is 0 and a
     file with this name already exists, then Smoldyn asks the user if
     it should be overwritten. If the user replies no, then this
     function ends with an error of ``ECerror``.

AddCommand
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddCommand(simptr sim, char type, double on, double off, double step, double multiplier, char *commandstring)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addCommand(string type, float on, float off, float step, float multiplier, string commandstring)``
   | Adds a run-time command to the simulation, including its timing
     instructions. This function should generally be called after
     ``smolSetSimTimes`` to make sure that command times get set
     correctly. The following table lists the command type options along
     with the other parameters that are used for each type. Parameters
     that are not required are simply ignored. The ``commandstring`` is
     the command name followed by any command parameters.

   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``type`` | meaning  | ``on``   | ``off``  | ``step`` | ``mult   |
   |          |          |          |          |          | iplier`` |
   +==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+
   | **Co     |          |          |          |          |          |
   | ntinuous |          |          |          |          |          |
   | time     |          |          |          |          |          |
   | queue**  |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``b``    | before   | -        | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | si       |          |          |          |          |
   |          | mulation |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``a``    | after    | -        | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | si       |          |          |          |          |
   |          | mulation |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``@``    | at fixed | time     | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | time     |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``i``    | fixed    | time on  | time off | time     | -        |
   |          | i        |          |          | step     |          |
   |          | ntervals |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``x``    | exp      | time on  | time off | min.     | mu       |
   |          | onential |          |          | time     | ltiplier |
   |          | i        |          |          | step     |          |
   |          | ntervals |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | *        |          |          |          |          |          |
   | *Integer |          |          |          |          |          |
   | time     |          |          |          |          |          |
   | queue**  |          |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``B``    | before   | -        | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | si       |          |          |          |          |
   |          | mulation |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``A``    | after    | -        | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | si       |          |          |          |          |
   |          | mulation |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``&``    | at fixed | i        | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | i        | teration |          |          |          |
   |          | teration |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``I``    | fixed    | iter. on | iter.    | iter.    | -        |
   |          | i        |          | off      | step     |          |
   |          | teration |          |          |          |          |
   |          | i        |          |          |          |          |
   |          | ntervals |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``E``    | every    | -        | -        | -        | -        |
   |          | time     |          |          |          |          |
   |          | step     |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
   | ``N``    | every    | -        | -        | iter.    | -        |
   |          | n’th     |          |          | step     |          |
   |          | time     |          |          |          |          |
   |          | step     |          |          |          |          |
   +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+

AddCommandFromString
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddCommandFromString(simptr sim, char *string)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode addCommandFromString(str string)``
   | Defines a runtime command, including its execution timing
     parameters, from the string ``string``. This string should be
     identical to ones used in configuration files, except that they do
     not include the “cmd" statement.

Molecules
---------

AddSpecies
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddSpecies(simptr sim, char *species, char *mollist)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode addSpecies(str species, str mollist)``
   | Python:
     ``Species name: str, state: str = "soln", color: T.Color = "", difc: float = 0.0, display_size: int = 2, mol_list: str = ""``
   | Adds a molecular species named ``species`` to the system. If you
     have already created species lists and want all states of this
     species to live in a specific list, then enter it in ``mollist``;
     otherwise, enter ``mollist`` as ``NULL`` or an empty string to
     request default behavior.

GetSpeciesIndex
   | 
   | C: ``int smolGetSpeciesIndex(simptr sim, char *species)``
   | C: ``int smolGetSpeciesIndexNT(simptr sim, char *species)``
   | Python: ``int getSpeciesIndex(str species)``
   | Returns the species index that corresponds to the species named
     ``species``. Upon failure, this function returns an error code cast
     as an integer. The “NT” version is identical, but doesn’t throw
     exceptions or print errors to stderr.

GetSpeciesName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolGetSpeciesName(simptr sim, int speciesindex, char *species)``
   | Python: ``str getSpeciesName(int speciesindex, str species)``
   | Returns the species name that corresponds to the species index in
     ``speciesindex``. The name is returned both in ``species`` and
     directly, where the latter simplifies function use. Upon failure,
     this function returns ``NULL``.

SetSpeciesMobility
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetSpeciesMobility(simptr sim, char *species, enum MolecState state, double difc, double *drift, double *difmatrix)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setSpeciesMobility(str species, MolecState state, float difc, List[float] drift, List[float] difmatrix)``
   | Python: *species*\ ``.difc``
   | Sets any or all of the mobility coefficients for species
     ``species`` (which may be “all") and state ``state`` (which may be
     ``MSall``). ``difc`` is the isotropic diffusion coefficient,
     ``drift`` is the drift vector, and ``difmatrix`` is the square of
     the anisotropic diffusion matrix (see the User’s manual). To not
     set coefficients, enter a negative number in ``difc`` and/or enter
     a ``NULL`` pointer in the other inputs, respectively.

   The last version shown can also be used to get the diffusion
   coefficient for a species.

AddMolList
   | 
   | C: ``int smolAddMolList(simptr sim, char *mollist)``
   | Python: ``int addMolList(str mollist)``
   | Adds a new molecule list, named ``mollist``, to the system.

GetMolListIndex
   | 
   | C: ``int smolGetMolListIndex(simptr sim, char *mollist)``
   | C: ``int smolGetMolListIndexNT(simptr sim, char *mollist)``
   | Python: ``int getMolListIndex(str mollist)``
   | Returns the list index that corresponds to the list named
     ``mollist``. The “NT” version is identical but doesn’t throw
     exceptions or print errors to the stderr output.

GetMolListName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolGetMolListName(simptr sim, int mollistindex, char *mollist)``
   | Python: ``str getMolListName(int mollistindex, str mollist)``
   | Returns the molecule list name that corresponds to the molecule
     list with index ``mollistindex``. The name is returned both in
     ``mollist`` and directly. On error, this function ``NULL``.

SetMolList
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetMolList(simptr sim, char *species, enum MolecState state, char *mollist)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setMolList(str species, MolecState state, str mollist)``
   | Python: *species*\ ``.mol_list``
   | Sets the molecule list for species ``species`` (which may be “all")
     and state ``state`` (which may be ``MSall``) to molecule list
     ``mollist``.

   The last version can either set or retrieve the molecule list.

SetMaxMolecules
   | 
   | C: ``smolSetMaxMolecules(simptr sim, int maxmolecules)``
   | Python: ``setMaxMolecules(int maxmolecules)``
   | Sets the maximum number of molecules that can simultaneously exist
     in a system to ``maxmolecules``. At present, this function needs to
     be called for a simulation to run, although it will become optional
     once dynamic molecule memory allocation has been written.

AddSolutionMolecules
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddSolutionMolecules(simptr sim, char *species, int number, double *lowposition, double *highposition)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addSolutionMolecules(str species, int number, List[float] lowposition, List[float] highposition)``
   | Python:
     *species*\ ``.addToSolution(mol: float, highpos: List[float] = [], lowpos: List[float] = [])``
   | Adds ``number`` solution state molecules of species ``species`` to
     the system. They are randomly distributed within the box that has
     its opposite corners defined by ``lowposition`` and
     ``highposition``. Any or all of these coordinates can equal each
     other to place the molecules along a plane or at a point. Enter
     ``lowposition`` and/or ``highposition`` as ``NULL`` to indicate
     that the respective corner is equal to that corner of the entire
     system volume.

AddCompartmentMolecules
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddCompartmentMolecules(simptr sim, char *species, int number, char *compartment)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addCompartmentMolecules(str species, int number, str compartment)``
   | Adds ``number`` solution state molecules of species ``species`` to
     the compartment ``compartment``. Molecules are randomly distributed
     within the compartment.

AddSurfaceMolecules
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddSurfaceMolecules(simptr sim, int speciesindex, enum MolecState state, int number, int surface, enum PanelShape panelshape, int panel, double *position)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addSurfaceMolecules(int speciesindex, MolecState state, int number, int surface, PanelShape panelshape, int panel, List[float] position)``
   | Adds ``number`` molecules of species ``species`` and state
     ``state`` to surface(s) in the system. It is permissible for
     ``surface`` to be “all", ``panelshape`` to be PSall, and/or
     ``panel`` to be “all". If you want molecules at a specific
     position, then you need to enter a specific surface, panel shape,
     and panel, and then enter the position in ``position``.

GetMoleculeCount
   | 
   | C:
     ``int smolGetMoleculeCount(simptr sim, char *species, enum MolecState state)``
   | Python: ``int getMoleculeCount(str species, MolecState state)``
   | Returns the total number of molecules in the system that have
     species ``species`` (“all" is permitted) and state ``state``
     (``MSall`` is permitted). Any error is returned as the error code
     cast as an integer.

SetMoleculeColor
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetMoleculeStyle(simptr sim, const char *species, enum MolecState state, double *color)``

SetMoleculeSize
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetMoleculeStyle(simptr sim, const char *species, enum MolecState state, double size)``

SetMoleculeStyle
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetMoleculeStyle(simptr sim, const char *species, enum MolecState state, double size, double *color)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setMoleculeStyle(str species, MolecState state, float size, List[float] color)``
   | Python: *species*\ ``.setStyle``
   | Python: *species*\ ``.color``
   | Python: *species*\ ``.size``
   | Sets the graphical display parameters for molecules of species
     ``species`` (“all" is permitted) and state ``state`` (``MSall`` is
     permitted). Enter ``size`` with the drawing size (in pixels if
     graphics method is “opengl" and in simulation system length units
     for better drawing methods) or with a negative number to not set
     the size. Enter ``color`` with the 3-value color vector or with
     ``NULL`` to not set the color (or, in Python, a color word).

Surfaces
--------

Boundaries
   | 
   | Python:
     ``Boundaries(low: List[float], high: List[float], types: List[str] = field(default_factory=lambda: ["r"]), dim: field(init=False) = 0)``
   | Python: ``setBounds()``
   | This functionality is only available in Python. There is a class
     called ``Boundaries`` and a function called ``setBounds``. They do
     basically the same thing.

SetBoundaryType
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetBoundaryType(simptr sim, int dimension, int highside, char type)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setBoundaryType(int dimension, int highside, str type)``
   | Sets the molecule interaction properties for a system boundary that
     bounds the ``dimension`` axis. Enter ``dimension`` as -1 to
     indicate all dimensions. Set ``highside`` to 0 for the lower
     boundary, to 1 for the upper boundary, and to -1 for both
     boundaries. The boundary type is entered in ``type`` as ‘r’ for
     reflecting, ‘p’ for periodic, ‘a’ for absorbing, or ‘t’ for
     transmitting. Note that Smoldyn only observes these properties if
     no surfaces are declared; otherwise all boundaries are transmitting
     regardless of what’s entered here.

AddSurface
   | 
   | C: ``int smolAddSurface(simptr sim, char *surface)``
   | Python: ``int addSurface(str surface)``
   | Adds a surface called ``surface`` to the system.

GetSurfaceIndex
   | 
   | C: ``int smolGetSurfaceIndex(simptr sim, char *surface)``
   | C: ``int smolGetSurfaceIndexNT(simptr sim, char *surface)``
   | Python: ``int getSurfaceIndex(str surface)``
   | Returns the surface index that corresponds to the surface named
     ``surface``. The index is non-negative. On failure, this returns an
     error code cast as an integer. The “NT” version is identical but
     errors aren’t printed to the stderr output and don’t throw
     exceptions.

GetSurfaceName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolGetSurfaceName(simptr sim, int surfaceindex, char *surface)``
   | Python: ``str getSurfaceName(int surfaceindex, str surface)``
   | Returns the surface name for surface number ``surfaceindex`` both
     directly and in the ``surface`` string. On failure, this returns
     ``NULL``.

SetSurfaceAction
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetSurfaceAction(simptr sim, char *surface, enum PanelFace face, char *species, enum MolecState state, enum SrfAction action, char *newspecies)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setSurfaceAction(str surface, PanelFace face, str species, MolecState state, SrfAction action)``
   | Python:
     *surface*\ ``.addAction(face, species: Union[Species, str], action: str, new_spec=None)``
   | Sets the action that should happen when a molecule of species
     ``species`` (may be “all") and state ``state`` (may be ``MSall``)
     diffuses into face ``face`` (may be ``PFboth``) of surface
     ``surface``. The action is set to ``action``. Enter ``newspecies``
     to the name of a new species if the molecule should change species,
     or as either ``NULL`` or an empty string if it should not change
     species.

SetSurfaceRate
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetSurfaceRate(simptr sim, char *surface, char *species, enum MolecState state, enum MolecState state1, enum MolecState state2, double rate, char *newspecies, int isinternal)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setSurfaceRate(str surface, str species, MolecState state, MolecState state1, MolecState state2, float rate, str newspecies, int isinternal)``
   | Sets the surface interaction rate(s) for surface ``surface`` (may
     be “all") and species ``species`` (may be “all") and state
     ``state``. The transition being considered is from ``state1`` to
     ``state2`` (this function uses the tri-state format for describing
     surface interactions, shown below). The interaction rate is set to
     ``rate``, which is interpreted as a probability value for internal
     use if ``isinternal`` is 1 and as a physical interaction
     coefficient if ``isinternal`` is 0. If the molecule ends up
     interacting with the surface, it changes to new species
     ``newspecies``. Enter ``newspecies`` as either ``NULL`` or an empty
     string to indicate that molecules should not change species upon
     interactions. The molecule states are most easily understood with
     the following table. If the action listed in the table is in
     italics, then the corresponding combination of states is not a
     permitted input.

   ================= =============== ========== ========== ===========
   interaction class tristate format                       action
   \                 ``state``       ``state1`` ``state2`` 
   \                 soln            soln       soln       *reflect*
   \                 "               "          bsoln      transmit
   collision from    "               "          bound      adsorb
   solution state    "               bsoln      soln       transmit
   \                 "               "          bsoln      *reflect*
   \                 "               "          bound      adsorb
   \                 "               bound      soln       desorb
   action from       "               "          bsoln      desorb
   bound state       "               "          bound      *no change*
   \                 "               "          bound’     flip
   \                 bound           soln       soln       *reflect*
   \                 "               "          bsoln      transmit
   \                 "               "          bound      hop
   collision from    "               "          bound’     hop
   bound state       "               bsoln      soln       transmit
   \                 "               "          bsoln      *reflect*
   \                 "               "          bound      hop
   \                 "               "          bound’     hop
   \                 "               bound      soln       desorb
   action from       "               "          bsoln      desorb
   bound state       "               "          bound      *no change*
   \                 "               "          bound’     flip
   impossible        "               bound’     any        *nonsense*
   ================= =============== ========== ========== ===========

AddPanel
   | 
   | C:
     ``int smolAddPanel(simptr sim, char *surface, enum PanelShape panelshape, char *panel, char *axisstring, double *params)``
   | Python:
     ``int addPanel(str surface, PanelShape panelshape, str panel, str axisstring, List[float] params)``
   | Adds or modifies a panel of shape ``panelshape`` of surface
     ``surface``. ``axisstring`` lists any text parameters for the
     panel, which in practice is only a single word that gives the
     orientation of a rectangle panel (e.g. “+0" or “-y"). ``params``
     lists the numerical parameters for the panel location, size, and
     drawing characteristics. These are exactly the same parameters that
     are listed for the “panel" statement in Smoldyn configuration
     files, with the sole exception that the first rectangle “parameter"
     is actually a string that is entered in ``axisstring``.
     ``panelname`` is an optional parameter for naming the panel; if it
     is included and is not an empty string, the panel is named
     ``panelname``. If this panel name was already used by a panel of
     the same shape, then this function overwrites that panel’s data
     with the new data. If the name was already used by a panel with a
     different shape, then this creates an error, and if the name was
     not used before, then a new panel is created. To use default panel
     naming, send in ``panelname`` as either ``NULL`` or as an empty
     string. In the latter case, ``panelname`` is returned with the
     newly assigned default name.

   In Python, each panel shape is a separate class. These classes are:

   -  Rectangle: corner: List[float], dimensions: List[float], axis:
      str, name=""

   -  Triangle: vertices: List[List[float]] = [[]], name=""

   -  Sphere: center: List[float], radius: float, slices: int, stacks:
      int, name=""

   -  Hemisphere: center: List[float], radius: float, vector:
      List[float], slices: int, stacks: int, name: str = ""

   -  Cylinder: start: List[float], end: List[float], radius: float,
      slices: int, stacks: int, name=""

   -  Disk: center: List[float], radius: float, vector: List[float],
      name=""

GetPanelIndex
   | 
   | C:
     ``int smolGetPanelIndex(simptr sim, char *surface, enum PanelShape *panelshapeptr, char *panel)``
   | C:
     ``int smolGetPanelIndexNT(simptr sim, char *surface, enum PanelShape *panelshapeptr, char *panel)``
   | Python:
     ``int getPanelIndex(str surface, PanelShape *panelshapeptr, str panel)``
   | Returns the panel index for the panel called ``panel`` on surface
     ``surface``. If ``panelshapeptr`` is not ``NULL``, this also
     returns the panel shape in ``panelshapeptr``. On failure, this
     returns the error code cast as an integer. The “NT” version is
     identical but errors aren’t printed to the stderr output and don’t
     cause exceptions to be thrown.

GetPanelName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolGetPanelName(simptr sim, char *surface, enum PanelShape panelshape, int panelindex, char *panel)``
   | Python:
     ``str getPanelName(str surface, PanelShape panelshape, int panelindex, str panel)``
   | Returns the name of the panel that is in surface ``surface``, has
     shape ``panelshape``, and has index ``panelindex``, both directly
     and in the string ``panel``. On failure, this returns ``NULL``.

SetPanelJump
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetPanelJump(simptr sim, const char *surface, const char *panel1, enum PanelFace face1, const char *panel2, enum PanelFace face2, int isbidirectional)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setPanelJump(str surface, str panel1, PanelFace face1, str panel2, PanelFace face2, int isbidirectional)``
   | Sets a jumping link between face ``face1`` of panel ``panel1`` and
     face ``face2`` of panel ``panel2`` of surface ``surface``. The link
     goes from ``panel1`` to ``panel2`` if ``bidirectional`` is entered
     as 0 and goes in both directions if ``bidirectional`` is entered as
     1. None of the surface, panel, or face entries is allowed to be
     “all". This does not set the actions of any species to “jump",
     which has to be done using the ``smolSetSurfaceAction`` function.

AddSurfaceUnboundedEmitter
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddSurfaceUnboundedEmitter(simptr sim, const char *surface, enum PanelFace face, const char *species, double emitamount, double *emitposition)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addSurfaceUnboundedEmitter(str surface, PanelFace face, str species, float emitamount, List[float] emitposition)``
   | Adds information about a point molecular source so that face
     ``face`` of surface ``surface`` can have its absorption properties
     calculated so that the molecular concentrations will become the
     same as they would be if the surface weren’t there at all. The
     point molecular source emits molecules of species ``species``, with
     a rate of ``emitamount`` and is at location ``emitposition``. The
     emission rate does not need to be in absolute units, but only has
     to be correct relative to other unbounded emitters. None of the
     inputs to this function are allowed to be “all".

SetSurfaceSimParams
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetSurfaceSimParams(simptr sim, const char *parameter, double value)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setSurfaceSimParams(str parameter, float value)``
   | Sets the surface simulation parameter named with ``parameter`` to
     value ``value``. The possible parameters are “epsilon", “margin",
     and “neighbordist". In all cases, the defaults are nearly always
     good, although this function allows them to be modified if desired.
     Epsilon is the maximum distance away from a surface that Smoldyn is
     allowed to place a surface-bound molecule. Margin is the distance
     inside from the edge of a surface panel that Smoldyn will place
     surface-bound molecules that hop onto this panel. Neighbor distance
     is the maximum distance over which surface-bound molecules are
     allowed to hop to transition from one panel to a neighboring panel.

AddPanelNeighbor
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddPanelNeighbor(simptr sim, const char *surface1, const char *panel1, const char *surface2, const char *panel2, int reciprocal)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addPanelNeighbor(str surface1, str panel1, str surface2, str panel2, int reciprocal)``
   | Adds panel ``panel2`` of surface ``surface2`` as a neighbor of
     panel ``panel1`` or surface ``surface1``, meaning that
     surface-bound molecules will be allowed to diffuse from ``panel1``
     to ``panel2``. These are not allowed to be the same panel. Also,
     “all" values are not permitted. Otherwise, essentially any possible
     entries are legitimate. If surface-bound molecules should also be
     allowed to diffuse from ``panel2`` to ``panel1``, enter
     ``reciprocal`` as 1; if not, enter ``reciprocal`` as 0.

SetSurfaceStyle
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetSurfaceStyle(simptr sim, const char *surface, enum PanelFace face, enum DrawMode mode, double thickness, double *color, int stipplefactor, int stipplepattern, double shininess)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setSurfaceStyle(str surface, PanelFace face, DrawMode mode, float thickness, List[float] color, int stipplefactor, int stipplepattern, float shininess)``
   | Python:
     *surface*\ ``.setStyle(face, drawmode: str, color: T.Color = "", thickness: float = 1, stipplefactor: int = -1, stipplepattern: int = -1, shininess: int = -1,)``
   | Sets the graphics output style for face ``face`` of surface
     ``surface``. ``mode`` is the drawing mode; enter it as ``DMnone``
     to not set this parameter and otherwise enter it as ``DMno`` to not
     draw the surface, ``DMvert`` for vertices, ``DMedge`` for edges, or
     ``DMface`` for faces. The ``thickness`` parameter gives the point
     size or line width for drawing vertices or edges, or can be entered
     as a negative number to not set this parameter. ``color`` is the
     4-value color vector for the surface, or can be entered as ``NULL``
     to not set this parameter (or, in Python, a color word).
     ``stipplefactor`` is the repeat distance for the entire edge
     stippling pattern, or can be entered as a negative number to not
     set it. ``stipplepattern`` is the edge stippling pattern, which
     needs to be between 0 and 0xFFFF, or can be entered as -1 to not
     set this parameter. And ``shininess`` is the surface shininess, for
     use with lighting in the “opengl_better" graphics display option,
     or can be entered as -1 to not set this parameter. The parameters
     ``thickness``, ``stipplefactor``, and ``stipplepattern`` only apply
     to edge style drawing modes and ignore any input in the ``face``
     entry. The ``shininess`` parameter only applies to the face style
     drawing modes.

Compartments
------------

AddCompartment
   | 
   | C: ``int smolAddCompartment(simptr sim, char *compartment)``
   | Python: ``int addCompartment(str compartment)``
   | Adds a compartment called ``compartment`` to the system.

GetCompartmentIndex
   | 
   | C: ``int smolGetCompartmentIndex(simptr sim, char *compartment)``
   | C: ``int smolGetCompartmentIndexNT(simptr sim, char *compartment)``
   | Python: ``int getCompartmentIndex(str compartment)``
   | Returns the index of the compartment named ``compartment``. On
     failure, this returns an error code cast as an integer. The “NT”
     version is identical but errors aren’t printed to the stderr output
     or cause exceptions to be thrown.

GetCompartmentName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolGetCompartmentName(simptr sim, int compartmentindex, char *compartment)``
   | Python:
     ``str getCompartmentName(int compartmentindex, str compartment)``
   | Returns the name of the compartment that has index
     ``compartmentindex`` both directly and in the string
     ``compartment``. Returns ``NULL`` if an error arises.

AddCompartmentSurface
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddCompartmentSurface(simptr sim, char *compartment, char *surface)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addCompartmentSurface(str compartment, str surface)``
   | Adds surface ``surface`` as one of the bounding surfaces of
     compartment ``compartment``.

AddCompartmentPoint
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddCompartmentPoint(simptr sim, char *compartment, double *point)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addCompartmentPoint(str compartment, List[float] point)``
   | Adds ``point`` as one of the interior-defining points of
     compartment ``compartment``.

AddCompartmentLogic
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddCompartmentLogic(simptr sim, char *compartment, enum CmptLogic logic, char *compartment2)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addCompartmentLogic(str compartment, CmptLogic logic, str compartment2)``
   | Modifies the current definition of compartment ``compartment``
     using a logical rule specified in ``logic`` and the definition of
     ``compartment2``.

Reactions
---------

AddReaction
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddReaction(simptr sim, const char *reaction, const char *reactant1, enum MolecState rstate1, const char *reactant2, enum MolecState rstate2, int nproduct, const char **productspecies, enum MolecState *productstates, double rate)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addReaction(str reaction, str reactant1, MolecState rstate1, str reactant2, MolecState rstate2, int nproduct, List[str] productspecies, List[MolecState] productstates, float rate)``
   | Python:
     ``Reaction(subs: List[Species], prds: List[Species], kf, kb=0.0)``
   | Adds reaction named ``reaction`` to the system. This reaction can
     have up to two reactants, whose species are listed in ``reactant1``
     and ``reactant2`` and whose states are listed in ``rstate1`` and
     ``rstate2``. If the reaction has fewer than two reactants, set
     either or both of ``reactant1`` and ``reactant2`` to either
     ``NULL`` or an empty string. State the number of reaction products
     in ``nproduct``, list their species in ``productspecies``, and list
     their states in ``productstates``. To set the reaction rate, enter
     it in ``rate``; otherwise, enter ``rate`` as a negative number.

GetReactionIndex
   | C:
     ``int smolGetReactionIndex(simptr sim, int *orderptr, char *reaction)``
   | C:
     ``int smolGetReactionIndexNT(simptr sim, int *orderptr, char *reaction)``
   | Python: ``int getReactionIndex(List[int] orderptr, str reaction)``
   | Returns the index and order for the reaction that is named
     ``reaction``. If the order is known, send in ``orderptr`` pointing
     to this value. If it is not known, send in ``orderptr`` equal to
     either ``NULL`` or pointing to a negative number; in this case, it
     will be returned pointing to the reaction order, if the reaction
     was found. On failure, this returns the error code, cast as an
     integer. The “NT” version is identical but errors don’t get
     displayed to the stderr output or cause exceptions to be thrown.

GetReactionName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char* smolGetReactionName(simptr sim, int order, int reactionindex, char *reaction)``
   | Python:
     ``str getReactionName(int order, int reactionindex, str reaction)``
   | Returns the name of the reaction that has reaction order ``order``
     and index ``reactionindex`` in the string ``reaction``. Also
     returns the result directly. Returns ``NULL`` if an error arises.

SetReactionRate
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetReactionRate(simptr sim, int order, char *reaction, double rate, int isinternal)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setReactionRate(int order, str reaction, float rate, int isinternal)``
   | Set the reaction rate to ``rate``. If this value is to be
     interpreted as an internal reaction rate parameter, meaning the
     production rate for zeroth order reactions, the reaction
     probability for first order reactions, or the binding radius for
     second order reactions, then set ``isinternal`` to 1. Rather than
     calling this function at all, it’s usually easier to use the
     ``rate`` parameter of the ``smolAddReaction`` function, although
     that doesn’t cope with internal rate values.

SetReactionRegion
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetReactionRegion(simptr sim, const char *reaction, const char *compartment, const char *surface)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setReactionRegion(str reaction, str compartment, str surface)``
   | Limits the spatial region where a reaction can take place to the
     compartment ``compartment`` and/or the surface ``surface``. To not
     set one of these limits, enter ``compartment`` and/or ``surface``
     as ``NULL``. To remove a previously set limit, enter
     ``compartment`` and/or ``surface`` as the empty string, “".

SetReactionIntersurface
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetReactionIntersurface(simptr sim, const char *reaction, int *rulelist)``
   | Set the intersurface reaction rules for the bimolecular reaction
     called ``reaction``. Intersurface reactions are reactions between
     two surface-bound molecules that are on two different surfaces. If
     ``rulelist`` is ``NULL``, then this returns the reaction to the
     default state, which is that intersurface reactions are not allowed
     for this reaction. Otherwise, ``rulelist`` should have one entry
     for each product. If the entry is 1, then that product is placed on
     the surface with the first reactant; if it is 2, then that product
     is placed on the surface with the second reactant. If a reaction
     has no products, then create a single element in ``rulelist`` equal
     to 0 to indicate that intersurface reactions are permitted.

SetReactionProducts
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolSetReactionProducts(simptr sim, const char *reaction, enum RevParam method, double parameter, const char *product, double *position)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode setReactionProducts(str reaction, RevParam method, float parameter, str product, List[float] position)``
   | Sets the reaction product parameters for reaction ``reaction``. At
     a minimum, the ``method`` reversible parameter is required. Most of
     these methods require a single parameter, entered in ``parameter``.
     A few methods also require a product, in ``product`` and the
     relative position of this product in ``position``.

   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``method``       | ``parameter``             | ``product``    | ``position``      |
   +==================+===========================+================+===================+
   | ``RPnone``       | -                         | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPirrev``      | -                         | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPconfspread`` | -                         | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPbounce``     | :math:`\sigma_u`          | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPpgem``       | :math:`\phi`              | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPpgemmax``    | :math:`\phi_{max}`        | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPpgemmaxw``   | :math:`\phi_{max}`        | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPratio``      | :math:`\sigma_u/\sigma_b` | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPunbindrad``  | :math:`\sigma_u`          | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPpgem2``      | :math:`\phi`              | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPpgemmax2``   | :math:`\phi_{max}`        | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPratio2``     | :math:`\sigma_u/\sigma_b` | -              | -                 |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPoffset``     | -                         | product number | relative position |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+
   | ``RPfixed``      | -                         | product number | relative position |
   +------------------+---------------------------+----------------+-------------------+

   If ``method`` is ``RPbounce``, then a negative number for the
   ``parameter`` indicates default bounce behavior, which is that
   molecules are separated by an amount that is equal to their previous
   overlap.

Ports
-----

AddPort
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddPort(simptr sim, const char *port, const char *surface, enum PanelFace face)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addPort(str port, str surface, PanelFace face)``
   | Python:
     ``Port(name: str, surface: Union[Surface, str], panel: str)``
   | Adds a port to the simulation. The port will be named ``port`` and
     will port at the ``face`` face of surface ``surface``.

GetPortIndex
   | 
   | C: ``int smolGetPortIndex(simptr sim, const char *port)``
   | C: ``int smolGetPortIndexNT(simptr sim, const char *port)``
   | Python: ``int getPortIndex(str port)``
   | Returns the index of the port named ``port``. The “NT” version is
     identical but errors don’t get displayed to the stderr output or
     cause exceptions to be thrown.

GetPortName
   | 
   | C: ``char* smolGetPortName(simptr sim, int portindex, char *port)``
   | Python: ``str getPortName(int portindex, str port)``
   | Returns the name of the port with index ``portindex``, both
     directly and in ``port``.

AddPortMolecules
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddPortMolecules(simptr sim, const char *port, int nmolec, const char *species, double **positions)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode addPortMolecules(str port, int nmolec, str species, List[float] positions)``
   | Adds ``nmolec`` molecules to Smoldyn’s import buffer of port
     ``port``. These molecules will all have species ``species`` and
     state ``MSsoln``. Enter ``positions`` as ``NULL`` to have the
     molecules positioned randomly over the porting surface and as an
     ``nmolec`` length list of position vectors to have them located at
     those specific initial positions. These initial positions should be
     close to the porting surface, and on the Smoldyn system side of it.

GetPortMolecules
   | 
   | C:
     ``int smolGetPortMolecules(simptr sim, const char *port, const char *species, enum MolecState state, int remove)``
   | Python:
     ``int getPortMolecules(str port, str species, MolecState state, int remove)``
   | Returns the number of molecules that are in Smoldyn’s export buffer
     of port ``port``. Enter ``species`` with the species of the
     molecules that should be retrieved, or “all" for all species. Enter
     ``state`` with the states of the molecules that should be
     retrieved, or ``MSall`` for all states. Enter ``remove`` with 1 to
     remove molecules from the export buffer after they are retrieved or
     with 0 to leave them in the buffer. If an error arises, this
     returns the error code cast as an integer.

Lattices
--------

AddLattice
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddLattice(simptr sim,const char *lattice,const double *min,const double *max,const double *dx,const char *btype)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode AddLattice(str lattice,List[float] min,List[float] max,List[float] dx,str btype)``
   | Adds a lattice to the simulation for hybrid operation. The lattice
     is named ``lattice`` and extends from ``min`` to ``max``, with
     lattice spacing ``dx``. The boundary types are given with
     ``btype``, which is a string of either ‘r’ characters for
     reflective boundary or ‘p’ characters for periodic boundary, with
     one character for each dimension and the dimensions listed in order
     (e.g. “rrp” is reflective on the :math:`x` and :math:`y` axes and
     periodic on the :math:`z` axis).

GetLatticeIndex
   | 
   | C: ``int smolGetLatticeIndex(simptr sim,const char *lattice)``
   | C: ``int smolGetLatticeIndexNT(simptr sim,const char *lattice)``
   | Python: ``int GetLatticeIndex(str lattice)``
   | Returns the index of the lattice named ``lattice``. The “NT”
     version is identical but errors don’t get displayed to the stderr
     output or cause exceptions to be thrown.

GetLatticeName
   | 
   | C:
     ``char *smolGetLatticeName(simptr sim,int latticeindex,char *lattice)``
   | Python: ``str getLatticeName(int latticeindex, str lattice)``
   | Returns the name of the lattice with index ``latticeindex``, both
     directly and in ``lattice``.

AddLatticeMolecules
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddLatticeMolecules(simptr sim,const char *lattice, const char *species,int number,double *lowposition,double *highposition)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode AddLatticeMolecules(str lattice, str species, int number, List[float] lowposition, List[float] highposition)``
   | Adds ``number`` molecules of species ``species`` to the lattice
     named ``lattice``, randomly positioned over the volume extending
     from ``lowposition`` to ``highposition``. These molecules will all
     have state ``MSsoln``.

AddLatticePort
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddLatticePort(simptr sim, const char *lattice, const char *port)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode AddLatticePort(str lattice, str port)``
   | Connects port ``port`` with lattice ``lattice``, so that molecules
     can transition across this port between the particle-based
     simulation region and the lattice-based simulation region.

AddLatticeSpecies
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddLatticeSpecies(simptr sim,const char *lattice, const char *species)``
   | Python: ``ErrorCode AddLatticeSpecies(str lattice, str species)``
   | Not all particle-based Smoldyn species are necessarily listed in a
     lattice portion of space, so use this function to add species to
     the lattice region of space. Clearly, the lattice is ``lattice``
     and the species being added is ``species``.

AddLatticeReaction
   | 
   | C:
     ``enum ErrorCode smolAddLatticeReaction(simptr sim,const char *lattice, const char *reaction, const int move)``
   | Python:
     ``ErrorCode AddLatticeReaction(str lattice, str reaction, int move)``
   | Not all particle-based Smoldyn reactions are necessarily listed in
     a lattice portion of space, so use this function to add reactions
     to the lattice region of space. Clearly, the lattice is ``lattice``
     and the reaction being added is ``reaction``.
